The setoid model of type theory can be used to show the consistency of
intensional type theory with certain extensionality principles, like function
extensionality. In addition, Altenkirch's formulation of such model justifies a
universe of strict (definitionally-proof irrelevant) propositions supporting
propositional extensionality, a limited form of univalence according to which
logically equivalent propositions are equal. The appeal of this model
construction is that it takes place in a small, intensional, type theoretic
metatheory, therefore giving a method to boostrap extensionality.

Recently, Altenkirch's setoid model has been turned into a formal system, under
the name of Setoid Type Theory (SeTT). SeTT can be presented as an extension of
intensional Martin-Loef type theory with syntactic constructs that internalize
setoid reasoning. These give full access to the extensionality principles that
hold in the setoid model, while retaining the convenience of an intensional
theory.

As currently defined, SeTT is already a rich theory. However, its introspection
capabilities are currently lacking, since it only includes (univalent)
universes for propositions. We would like to extend SeTT with a universe of setoids
internalizing the notion of type beyond propositions. This amounts to extending
the setoid model with a semantics for such a universe.

In this paper, we present the construction of a (non-univalent)
universe of setoids within the setoid model. The universe is given in
steps, first as an inductive-recursive definition, which is then
translated to an inductive-inductive definition, and finally to an
inductive family. Every step is obtained from the previous by applying
known reduction methods, although in a novel way. Additionally, our
construction shows the setoid model with the additional encoding of
the universe can still be defined in a relatively small metatheory,
that however must include a universe of strict propositions, indexed W
types, and a proof-irrelevant identity type with a strong transport
rule. All the mathematical developments described in the paper have
been formalized in the Agda proof-assistant.
