---------------------- REVIEW 1 ---------------------
SUBMISSION: 39
TITLE: Constructing a universe for the setoid model
AUTHORS: Thorsten Altenkirch, Simon Boulier, Ambrus Kaposi, Christian Sattler and Filippo Sestini

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
SCORE: 2 (accept)
----- TEXT:
In prior work, Altenkirch et al. have presented Setoid Type Theory, a version
of Martin-Loef Type Theory that internalizes the setoid model of type theory in
order to obtain certain extensionality principles (including function
extensionality, propositional extensionality, and well-behaved quotients)
without disrupting the computational properties of type theory.

While is clear how to form a "setoid of propositions", the correct notion of
"setoid of small setoids" is elusive --- clearly there can be no canonical
notion of "setoid of small setoids", because the canonical notion of
identification between two setoids is (weak) equivalence. Several approaches to
defining a _non-canonical_ setoid of small setoids appear in the literature:

1. The inductive-recursive universes of Observational Type Theory/OTT
(Altenkirch, McBride, Swierstra).

2. The inductive universes of XTT (Sterling, Angiuli, Gratzer); though these
have an inductive-recursive flavor, they do not use induction-recursion.
Instead they rely on a combination of W types, extensional equality types,
dependent sum types, and the transfinite universe hierarchy of the extensional
type theory of a presheaf topos assuming the axiom that every set is classified
by a Grothendieck universe.

2. The approach of Palmgren based on well-orderings via an internal model of
CZF: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1909.01414.pdf. This recent work of Palmgren supersedes
the cited work of Palmgren and Wilander, and is carried out not in set theory but internally
to MLTT, formalized in Agda no less! This reference _must_ be cited and discussed in the related
work section of the revised version of this paper.

The contribution of the present paper is a reduction of the inductive style
construction (1,2) of universes that can be carried out in a version of
intensional type theory _without_ function extensionality or equality
reflection, but with proof-irrelevant identity types and indexed W-types.
Another secondary contribution of the paper is a much more clear explanation of
SeTT than had previously appeared.

We regard the contributions of the present paper to be of value to the
scientific community; these results will increase the confidence of type
theorists as they attempt to extend the theory of universes to settings where
they are less well-understood.  The reduction of induction-recursive universes
to inductive types in the context of extensional type theory + enough
meta-universes is folklore (depending on your milieu), but this paper goes
quite a bit further than substantiating the folklore by showing that the
reduction can in fact be carried out in (a version of) intensional type theory
-- a result which I have to admit I was surprised and impressed by.

A very interesting aspect of this paper (which is not trumpeted by the authors
nearly enough!) is the way that the reduction to inductive types relates to the
classic arguments that the raw syntax of dependent type theory has a universal
property as the initial model of that type theory, for instance the argument of
Streicher.  It would be nice to have more discussion about this connection,
because it seems as though one hidden contribution of this paper may be to
better understand some of the older techniques for proving initiality of raw
syntax in the guise of reducing induction-induction to induction.

While I have some reservations about the motiviations of this paper (see my
critique below), I do think it makes a worthwhile contribution and should be
accepted.

CRITIQUE
--------

My main critique is that it is unclear what the advantage is of an _intensional_
justification of these universes, as opposed to an extensional justification
that is much easier to carry out. The purpose of the reduction is to be
able to obtain models of SeTT in more restricted settings (which is extremely
welcome!), but it is unclear that there are any _interesting_ non-syntactic
models of ITT+ProofIrrelevantId+W that are not also models of full ETT+W.

The authors make quite a bit of celebratory commotion over the fact that their
metatheory needs neither equality reflection nor function extensionaliity, thus
somehow the "justification" of SeTT is stronger than justifications of type
theory that rely on extensional type theory in the background. The opinion of
this reviewer is that this emphasis is a red herring, and does a disservice to
the principled interaction between type theorists and serious mathematicians
for whom a non-extensional notion of function rightly requires more
justification than the ordinary extensional one.

In modern mathematics and type theory, we are _not_ concerned with "what
depends on what" for some old-fashioned fear that our developments might come
crashing down (the old intellectual black hole of Frege and Russell, from which
logicians never sufficiently awakened); rather, we are concerned with enlarging
in a _useful_ way the areas of applicability of a given theory, and the authors
do not provide a convincing argument that a metatheory without function
extensionality is realistic.


SMALL REQUEST
-------------

I appreciated how you gave the (algebraic) rules of SeTT abstractly,
_independently_ of the syntactic translation. It is important to distinguish
between a language and some model of that language, even if you are using a
powerful metalanguage as a logical framework.

But where are the rules for the universe itself? You seem to just give a
construction of the universe in the metalanguage, but I would appreciate if you
could give (some of) the rules you expect to validate abstractly beforehand and
then show separately how to substantiate it with your construction. I realize
there is not a great distance between what you have written and what I have
requested, but I think the change would improve your paper and make it more
accessible.


SMALLER REMARKS
---------------

- Page 2. "This rules out function extensionality" --- this sentence is
  confusingly phrased, but I know what you mean. It may be better to be
  explicit and say "This implies equality reflection, which destroys the
  computational properties of open terms."

- Page 3. "The setoid model thus satisfies all the extensionality principles
  that we would like to have in type theory". Perhaps it is better to say that
  it satisfies _many_ of the extensionality principles we would like to have. It
  does not satisfy the most consequential extensionality principle of all.

- Page 4. Throughout the paper, "universe induction" from XTT is treated as if
  it is a feature that one might miss or want to add to SeTT if it turns out to
  not hold, but it is this referee's view that universe induction is a bug in XTT
  rather than a feature. If your universes do not satisfy a useful induction
  principle, all the better. Embrace it!

- Page 4. There is much made over the supposed complication in cubical type
  theories (like XTT) stemming from the use of an interval, and while this
  complication is real and worthy of critique, the present paper does not locate
  it correctly. The reader might get the very mistaken impression that the
  complication is somehow stemming from the fact that the interval is a pretype
  and not a real type. Of course, this couldn't possibly be the real reason
  it is a mitzvah to avoid the interval!

  The reason it is a mitzvah to avoid the interval is that in cubical type
  theories, many terms will exhibit a "critical boundary" along some  >-> I^n
  such that under =\top they must compute further -- rendering a cubically stable
  notion of neutral term out of reach. This problem significantly complicates the
  syntactic metatheory of cubical type theory as well as its implementation.

  Therefore, it is very welcome that SeTT avoids the interval --- but it sounds
  like the authors of this paper have misunderstood what aspect of cubical type
  theory is actually complicated. The fact that the interval is a "pretype" is
  the easiest part of the story, and it is really misleading to act as though
  this is the disadvantage of the interval when there are factually significant
  problems faced by type theories that use the interval.

- Page 5. The remark about the combination of impredicativity and strong
  transport leading to a failure of normalization is true but is not
  particularly relevant to the present paper. Moreover, the result of Abel and
  Coquand only applies to a naive type-free approach to normalization, if I
  recall correctly. But the authors of the present paper are well aware that it
  is already ill-advised to use untyped reductions for normalization anyway.


----------------------- REVIEW 2 ---------------------
SUBMISSION: 39
TITLE: Constructing a universe for the setoid model
AUTHORS: Thorsten Altenkirch, Simon Boulier, Ambrus Kaposi, Christian Sattler and Filippo Sestini

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
SCORE: 1 (weak accept)
----- TEXT:
* Review

  This article discusses various possibilities for equipping Setoid
  Type Theory (SeTT) with an internal universe of setoids.  The
  motivation behind SeTT is the study of extensionality principles in
  type theory: SeTT has functional and propositional extensionality by
  definition, and these features have been justified in previous work
  via a syntactic translation to Martin-Lof Type Theory extended with
  a universe of strict propositions.  The addition of universes would
  appear to be a logical next step to increase the expressibility of
  the theory.

  In fact, the article presents three constructions.  First, an
  inductive-recursive definition which, while being perhaps the most
  natural and straightforward, requires the strongest hypotheses of
  the meta-language.  Next, and inductive-inductive description using
  an "inclusion predicate", which, intuitively, singles out those
  types which should appear in the image of the previously described
  inductive-recursive "El" function.  And finally, a sketch of a purely
  inductive approach.

  I find that the techniques presented in this article are useful and
  interesting, and deserve to be included in the published record.
  Indeed, even using powerful tools such as induction-recursion, it is
  clear that the construction is quite non-trivial (which is perhaps
  why it was not included in the original work on the subject).  And
  for example, in the inductive-inductive case, the technique of
  defining the indexed equivalence relation by induction on codes at
  the end of 4.3 shows some of the inventive ideas required to
  circumvent various issues of proof-relevance which appear throughout
  the paper.  It is somewhat surprising, given all the constraints,
  that the definition can be carried out at all, which is perhaps the
  article's strongest merit.

  I do have some concerns, however, related to Section 4.4.  I was
  quite surprised, given the claims of the introduction, that the
  construction does not seem to be carried out completely.  While
  there is an idea sketched for how to proceed, the details are
  extremely sketchy, limited to the next to last paragraph in which we
  are told that "it would seem" that simple elimination suffices, and
  that careful inspection "suggests" that the required functions may
  be defined by simple mutual pattern matching.  Frankly, it is
  difficult from what is presented in the article to make a real
  judgement about these claims.  In particular, I am left completely
  unsure of the status of the claim in the "Contributions" section
  that "we only need to assume indexed W-types and proof-irrelevant
  identity types in the meta-theory."  Is this in fact the case or
  not?  Given that this seems to be a central claim of the article, I
  think this point should be significantly more carefully treated.  In
  general, this last section seems quite hurried and ends quite
  abruptly.  I think the article would be improved by making it clear
  to the reader early-on the differing state of completeness of the
  first two constructions from the third.

* Various Comments/Typos

** Page 8, Third paragraph

   What is "partially fibrant"?  This notion is not explained at all.

** Page 10, Last paragraph before section 4.1

   "with propositions given as elements of a universe of *propositions*"

** Section 4.2

   The presentation starting in the second paragraph here is a bit
   confusing.  We are told that we are to define a type \mathbb{U}
   in every context, but then the next definition is of \mathcal{U},
   i.e. the interpretation of this type.  I realize it is in general
   just confusing to be working simultaneously with the theory and
   its model, but I feel that the presentation here could have been
   improved by more systematically separating the syntax from the
   semantics, i.e giving the intended syntactic rules *first* and
   then their interpretations.

** Page 16

   The introduction of the "simple" eliminators here is quite
   confusing.  The explanation comes much lower, where it is claimed
   that the construction only relies on the simple case, but as this
   is not motivated ahead of time, it is difficult to understand what
   to make of this distinction on the first reading.


----------------------- REVIEW 3 ---------------------
SUBMISSION: 39
TITLE: Constructing a universe for the setoid model
AUTHORS: Thorsten Altenkirch, Simon Boulier, Ambrus Kaposi, Christian Sattler and Filippo Sestini

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
SCORE: -1 (weak reject)
----- TEXT:
A long-standing difficulty with formal type theory is that it is unable to express the
  natural---even essential---principle of function extensionality at the level of the identity type.
  The difficulty is that the inhabitation of the identity type is not type-specific, with the
  consequence that identity at function types expresses definitional, rather than extenstional,
  equality of functions.  This is too fine for almost any purpose.

  Several solutions to this difficulty have been proposed.  The one used here is the "setoid model"
  of type theory, in which one associates to each type a binary relation that defines equality at
  that type.  This resolves the question of function extensionality in that it provides a semantic
  grounding for the concept in the "bedrock" of intensional type theory, expressed via
  interpretation of SeTT, a type theory for the setoid model, into ITT.

  The present work is concerned with extending this interpretation to account for universes, which
  raises the question of what, exactly, are universes?  One view is that taken in Homtopy Type
  Theory in which types are identified up to a very coarse equivalence.  Here an intermediate point
  is taken that is not compatible with univalence, but which permits the construction of universes
  within the setoid model, using a inductive-recursive construction that, by stages, is reduced to
  the base intensional type theory.

  Some comments: 1. To this reviewer the imperative to reduce things to ITT is not very
  well-justified, because, then, what justifies ITT itself?  There is always an infinite Goedelian
  descent; why stop at ITT?  This remark does not undermine the technical development, it is more a
  question of motivation.  2. One motivation that always arises is decidability of type checking.
  This is an anodyne consideration, but the fact of the matter is that the decidability problem is
  wildly intractible (results of Statman apply), putting it entirely out of any practical reach.  So
  why bother?  3. The treatment of universes as inductively constructed is well-established, and
  well-criticized.  Something should be said about the two sides to this debate.  In particular the
  relation to the NuPRL semantics---which is setoid-based, though long predating that terminology---
  and its treatment of universes.  In particular it was long ago considered in the NuPRL type theory
  whether or not to "expose" the inductive structure of universes in the "published theory".  The
  authors raise this exact question, as if it were new, but in fact it dates back decades.  One side
  of it is that the structure is "there" and it is odd to "ignore" it.  Yes, one can neglect it in a
  formalism, or one can include it in a formalism.  This shows that formalisms do not define the
  subject matter, a position long taken by the NuPRL Project.  A full and proper comparison to what
  is done in NuPRL, particularly the more recent developments by Anand and Rahli, is mandatory for
  acceptance.


----------------------- REVIEW 4 ---------------------
SUBMISSION: 39
TITLE: Constructing a universe for the setoid model
AUTHORS: Thorsten Altenkirch, Simon Boulier, Ambrus Kaposi, Christian Sattler and Filippo Sestini

----------- Overall evaluation -----------
SCORE: 1 (weak accept)
----- TEXT:
In this paper, the authors extend the setoid model of dependent type theory to account for a universe closed under Pi-types. This continues a line of work on justifying extensional principles in intensional type theories by means of a setoid model definable in another intensional type theory, a problem considered particularly by Martin Hofmann in his thesis [17], whose S_1 model admits a universe for which closure under Pi-types requires metatheoretic function extensionality, and by Thorsten Altenkirch in [4], who defines a universe closed under function types, using a metatheoretic universe of strict propositions.

This paper formalizes Altenkirch's construction in the Agda proof assistant with its recently-added (s)Prop feature, using induction-recursion to extend his model to Pi-types. Then, the authors carefully analyze the strength of inductive definition necessary to carry out the construction, reducing this IR definition to induction-induction and ultimately inductive families, although the details of this last reduction are not fully worked out. Finally, the authors position this work as an extension of setoid type theory (SeTT), a type theory which, like OTT and XTT (and more subtly, HoTT and cubical type theory), attempts to capture extensional concepts in an intensional type theory.

The main contribution, an Agda formalization and extension of Altenkirch's model, is quite timely and interesting to the type-theoretic community: it was mentioned as a use case of sProp when sProp was implemented two years ago [16]. The modifications of this model to rely on weaker induction schemas are also relevant and a welcome inclusion to the paper, although perhaps of interest to a smaller crowd.

However, I have a significant reservation, which is that the submission fails to cite and/or adequately discuss highly related work, particularly by Erik Palmgren. Instead, much of the motivation and discussion focuses on SeTT and a comparison to XTT, which is strange given that the paper is not really about SeTT, and only discusses its details in Section 3.2. If this issue is addressed in the rebuttal and revision, I enthusiastically support acceptance.

Detailed comments
-----------------

Besides Martin Hofmann, Erik Palmgren was perhaps the main proponent of the theory of setoids within ITT. The authors mention and cite Palmgren only once: tangentially in reference to joint work with Olov Wilander dismissed as being "a translation into constructive set theory". However, that paper describes a category of typeoids in a *model of CZF in Coq*, so it seems much more relevant than the authors suggest. Moreover, Palmgren's "Constructions of categories of setoids from proof-irrelevant families" describes a version of that idea that does not detour through CZF.

It is true that Palmgren was focused on developing well-behaved *category theory* rather than models of type theory, but I cannot fathom that this distinction renders his work so irrelevant as to not merit discussion. Please discuss the relationship between his "proof-irrelevant families of setoids" and your sProp-valued setoids, and why his constructions (which do not rely on sProp) do not suffice for your purposes. For what it is worth, I am willing to believe that they do not suffice, but a serious discussion is missing. If the authors need space, I suggest abbreviating the discussion of SeTT and XTT.

There are a number of other works that the authors should also consider citing and discussing, but I leave these to the authors' discretion. There are other projects aimed at defining more extensional type theories inside more intensional ones, including the "Minimalist Foundations" project of Maria Emilia Maietti and Giovanni Sambin, and "Towards a Formally Verified Proof Assistant" by Abhishek Anand and Vincent Rahli. In the context of cubical type theory specifically, Jasper Hugunin has given a reduction of induction-induction to inductive families, and Thierry Coquand has defined a sub-presheaf of the uniform Kan cubical set universe corresponding to the setoids (http://www.cse.chalmers.se/~coquand/bishop.pdf).

SeTT extends ITT by exposing some *but not all* aspects of the setoid model defined in MLTT^Prop. The original paper on SeTT [5] is relatively clear about which aspects are internalized, but when reading this paper, I was uncertain which parts of the universe construction are to be surfaced in SeTT. This is exacerbated by "stat[ing] the context equalities as elements of the external, metatheoretic universe Prop", which blurs the distinction between the model and SeTT to the point that I do not know what "a SeTT model" itself would be.

[5] conjectures that SeTT is complete for the setoid model and satisfies canonicity. I am personally not so sure that these hold for SeTT, but I am surprised that the authors do not conjecture completeness or canonicity for "SeTT + universes", whatever that is. Are these properties expected?

As a side remark, the authors tout that SeTT's equality types are definitionally equal to their expansions, as opposed to having a definitional isomorphism as in cubical type theories. I think this is not actually a good idea: in practice, one does not want equality in a large compound type to automatically unfold to an even larger type, and these equations likely rule out many SeTT models.

The claim that universe induction "is known to be inconsistent with univalence" is only true for the wrong induction principle. The universes in cubical type theory can be viewed as a higher inductive-recursive type with a constructor for Glue types. Of course, it is true that the resulting typecase cannot distinguish equivalent types.

Minor comments:

- p. 3: "The question is whether there exists a version of intensional type theory that supports setoid reasoning..." We want to support *extensional* reasoning, not specifically *setoid* reasoning, right?
- pp. 3-4: OTT citations are [9,9].
- p. 5: Did you mean to omit a universe from your list of type formers in MLTT^Prop? Your constructions use Type and Type_1.
- p. 10: "and $\Pi$." is on the same line as the displays of U and El.
- p. 14: "should be Prop_1-valued relation" (missing word)

Questions for the authors
-------------------------

Most importantly, I would like the authors to describe the relation to Palmgren's proof-irrelevant families of setoids.

I am also curious whether the authors know of any IR schema that justifies the definition in Section 4.2. (The paper is a bit vague on this point.) Likewise, is there an established II schema that encompasses Section 4.3?

Finally, the Id type considered here is rather strong. Because the authors are interested in weakening the metatheory as much as possible, I am curious whether they believe the metatheory could be further simplified---pending, I suppose, whether the construction indeed does not require recursion-recursion as conjectured.
